feat(patterns): add Loaders documentation (#455)
zendeskgarden/website: src/pages/patterns/loaders.mdx

---
title: Loaders
description: >
  Loaders are used when certain elements or parts of the page could take longer to display.
---

![Loaders intro](figma:patterns-loaders-intro.png)

## Overview

Different loaders are used to communicate structure and context of the content being loaded,
each one tailored to a specific use case.

> <table>

Reviewer: if it would be easier for you, you could convert this table into a markdown table and use `[text](link)` for the links. I see you have a 30% width though and I don't know if that could be retained. Either way, just throwing it out there.

Reviewer: here's a basic translation of the code into that format as an example:

```
| Component                       | Description                                                               |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Skeleton](/components/spinner) | Default Loader. Used when the content on the pagei s known or predictable |
```

Reviewer 2: I thought of the same thing! This would be an improvement.

Reviewer: Just tried removing the 30% from the deploy preview and it seems to render the same on narrow and wide widths. I think its worth doing @steue - let me know if i can help at all.

Reviewer 3: +1. Let's use markdown; this is consistent with other pages such as https://garden.zendesk.com/content/voice-and-tone. Also, please remember to use markdown rather than `<a>` tags for links.

Author: nice! i've changed the tables to use markdown. the 30% column width really did help with readability as now without it there's a bit too much space in between the columns.

i did some research and it looks like there isn't a (non hacky) way to do column sizing with markdown? that said, i think its okay for now.

  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th width="30%">Component</th>
      <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/components/skeleton">Skeleton</a>
      </td>
      <td>Default loader. Used when the content on the page is known or predictable.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/components/spinner">Spinner</a>
      </td>
      <td>

>         Used as an alternative to the Skeleton loader when the content is unknown or unpredictable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        Used as an alternative to the Skeleton loader when the content is unknown or unpredictable
```

[nit] see https://garden.zendesk.com/content/punctuation#period

      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/components/dots">Dots</a>
      </td>
      <td>
        Used inside the interface to represent a busy state. For example, inside buttons,
        asynchronous loading menus, or other small components.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/components/progress">Progress</a>
      </td>

>       <td>Used for communicating progress from 0 to 100%.</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      <td>Used for communicating progress from 0 to 100%</td>
```

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/components/inline">Inline</a>
      </td>
      <td>Reserved for typing indicators.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Usage

### Predictable content

> When loading pages or parts of pages with predictable layout, <a href="/components/skeleton">Skeleton loader</a>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When loading pages or parts of pages with predictable layout, [Skeleton loader](/components/skeleton)
```

markdown is always preferred when possible.

is used to show a blank stand-in version of the component that has not fully loaded. It provides a visual estimate of
the space needed. This is the preferred loader in most situations as it provides a sense of progress, helps orient the
user, and sets expectations on the type of content they can expect.

![Example of skeleton loaders for predictable content](figma:patterns-loaders-skeleton.png)

The size of the loader should approximately reflect the content it represents. Show a few skeleton loaders to orient
the user, but don’t map out every element even if a page has a lot of content. Mapping out skeleton loaders in the
first few elements of the header/body area are enough to convey the loading process.

Loader animation has a built-in short delay which should give time for the fast loading content to show before the
loader becomes visible. Loader should be persistent until the content is fully loaded.

> Use default skeleton loaders on white or light backgrounds. Use light skeleton loaders on dark backgrounds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use default skeleton loaders on white or light backgrounds. Use [light skeleton loaders](/components/skeleton#light) on dark backgrounds.
```

would this link be helpful here?

<BestPractice>
  <Do
    imageIsFreeForm
    imageSource={props.data.LoadersSkeletonDo.childFile.childImageSharp.gatsbyImageData}
    alt="A few skeleton loaders to orient the user"
  >
    <ul>
      <li>Show a skeleton loader to orient the user.</li>
    </ul>
  </Do>
  <Dont
    imageIsFreeForm
    imageSource={props.data.LoadersSkeletonDont.childFile.childImageSharp.gatsbyImageData}
    alt="Too many skeleton loaders"
  >
    <ul>
      <li>Avoid mapping every line with a skeleton loader.</li>
    </ul>
  </Dont>
</BestPractice>

### Unpredictable content

> A <a href="/components/spinner">Spinner loader</a> is used when content is unknown or unpredictable. Spinner appears

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A [Spinner loader](/components/spinner) is used when content is unknown or unpredictable. Spinner appears
```

before a page is loaded to assure a user that the content is on its way. Use spinners for pages and screens or within
components such as tables. Center the spinner in the container or content you’re applying it to. Spinner is also used
as an alternative loader to Skeleton in situations where the content can't be easily estimated but it's still
important to provide a sense of progress.

> ![Example of Spinner loader for unpredictable content](figma:patterns-loaders-spinner.png)

Reviewer 4: Is there an opportunity here to make the alt text a bit more descriptive? Maybe we can describe what else is on the screen or in the UI in this context.

Reviewer 3: Thanks @jgorfine-zendesk. Given the target audience in combination with Garden's emphasis on excellent content design practice, we believe we've hit the right balance here. Punting for now; potential follow-on in the new year.

### Completing action

> The <a href="/components/dots">Dots loader</a> communicates ongoing activity after a user takes an action. It tells

Reviewer 3: Please use markdown for the link here.

them that something is taking place. Dots loader is used for buttons, search inputs, or other small components to
indicate these components are doing something.

Use the loader for actions where it might take several seconds for the process to complete.

> ![Example of dot loaders when completing an action](figma:patterns-loaders-completing-action.png)

Reviewer 4: Same question here RE descriptive alt text!

1. <a href="/components/button#type">Primary buttons</a> are common candidates for using this loader

> 1. <a href="/components/icon-button">Icon buttons</a> are less likely to use this loader but still necessary

Reviewer 4: Is this supposed to be 2?
```suggestion
2. <a href="/components/icon-button">Icon buttons</a> are less likely to use this loader but still necessary
```

Reviewer 5: Fun fact - they can all be 1 for easier maintenance. https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#ordered-lists

> The numbers don’t have to be in numerical order, but the list should start with the number one.

Reviewer 4: Good to know! Thanks, @smritimadan.

> 1. <a href="/components/icon-button">Icon buttons</a> are less likely to use this loader but still necessary

Reviewer 3: Please use markdown for these links.

   if the user needs to be informed of the action taking place

Use the loader for search inputs if it might take several seconds to perform the query.

![Example of dot loaders during search](figma:patterns-loaders-search-inputs.png)

> Use the loader for <a href="/components/menu">Menus</a> where it might take several seconds to show information.

Reviewer 3: ditto re: markdown :wink:

![Example of dot loaders in a menu](figma:patterns-loaders-menu.png)

### Progress

A <a href="/components/progress">Progress loader</a> communicates progress from 0 to 100% when downloading or

> uploading content. The most common use for a progress loader is in the <a href="/components/file-upload">File upload</a>

Reviewer 3: moar markdown :wink:

component. Descriptive text is displayed to help clarify
what is in progress.

![Example of progress loaders in a File upload](figma:patterns-loaders-progress.png)

### Typing

> The <a href="/components/inline">Inline loader</a> is used as a typing indicator. This signals the other party is

Reviewer 3: link markdown

present and preparing a reply. The loader should be centered in the message bubble with other content
appearing above or below.

![Example of Inline loader when typing in chat](figma:patterns-loaders-typing.png)

## Localization

### Right-to-left languages

Some loaders are direction-agnostic, which means that they are always positioned in the same place within the context,
and use the same direction for any animation elements. Dots and Spinner are examples of that.

Skeleton, Progress and Inline change direction for right-to-left languages. Skeleton animation and layout should change
direction. Progress loader should fill from the right (0) to the left (100%) side. Inline animation should change direction.

> ## Accessibility

Reviewer 4: Is there an opportunity to share this article here? [More Accessible Skeletons](https://adrianroselli.com/2020/11/more-accessible-skeletons.html)

Reviewer 3: We'll punt on this for now.

> ## Accessibility

Reviewer 4: Is it worth making a note here about accessible animations? 🤔

Reviewer 2: @jgorfine-zendesk do you have any good sources on that?

Reviewer 4: @Francois-Esquire — yes! I don't know if we'll want to reference [this Confluence page directly](https://zendesk.atlassian.net/l/cp/92enuYtQ), but maybe we can pluck out the best info & links from there.

Reviewer 3: Since this page already worked its way through design, we'll punt on this for now. Thanks.

> Loaders have ARIA `role="progressbar"` applied to indicate the loading status. The `aria-live`, `alert`, or `status` role

Reviewer 4: > Loaders have ARIA `role="progressbar"` applied to indicate the loading status.

Hey @steue — wanted to flag that this is only true for some loaders! (I recently had to change it for the Dots and Spinner loaders, per the a11y audit results). Would it be worth updating the language here to reflect that?

Author: oh! good catch, the messaging should be consistent!

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the updated text, @steue

> Loaders have ARIA `role="progressbar"` applied to indicate the loading status. The `aria-live`, `alert`, or `status` role

Reviewer 4: Just wanted to offer more specific language here, for the names of the attributes:
```suggestion
The `aria-live` property, `alert` role, or `status` role
```

Reviewer 2: Would it be `property` or `attribute`?

Reviewer 4: @Francois-Esquire they're all attributes; roles and properties (and states) are just different, more specific categories. See [Digital A11y's WAI-ARIA 1.1 Cheatsheet](https://www.digitala11y.com/wai-aria-1-1-cheat-sheet/).

Reviewer 4: But if it'd be more helpful to refer to it as an attribute, that's fine!
